# Kostof by Pyla #

"Although Kostof attempts to transcend traditional distinctions by
declaring that the history of "other cultures" is important to
understanding the history of "our" architecture, what escapes him is
that the distinctions between other architectural traditions and ours
may not be as "natural" as he thinks. Kostof's theory should not deflect
attention from the methods of his historical practices, which are in
essence synchronic cross-cultural comparisons." (Pyla 1999:217)

"they do not challenge the tendency to use Renaissance architecture as a
yardstick for architectural quality" (Pyla 1999:219)

"The tendency to consider only those aspects of the history that are
directly comparable can also explain why the two main comparative
analyses (Istanbul and Venice, Cairo and Florence) refer to
Mediterranean cultures, while discussions on the architecture of China
or India are much more cursory" (Pyla 1999:220)

". His notion of interaction as a structure of historical organization,
does not allow Kostof to accommodate the history of India or China,
except when he discusses the "Silk Road," which establishes a direct
interaction between these countries and the West. It is fair to ask,
however, does the lack of "interaction" between the Chinese or the
Indian context and the West render the centuries-old architecture of
these countries irrelevant to our understanding of architectural
history?" (Pyla 1999:220)

"By not acknowledging the different developments in different Islamic
cultures through time, he perhaps inadvertently essentializes "Islam" as
a single static culture" (Pyla 1999:221)

"Even though he may have thus "broadened the scope" of architectural
history by offering some knowledge about the impact of Islam or the
qualities of Nepalese villages, Kostof's integrationist tendency tends
to perpetuate, rather than challenge, the canonical view of history as
having a unified or unitary relationship to itself." (Pyla 1999:221)

"4 The "western achievement, Kostof calls it, may not appear entirely
"insulated," but it still appears to have a pretty "logical
progression,"2" (Pyla 1999:221)

"Unlike what Kostof seems to assume, cross-cultural interaction as a
historiographic tool does not automatically facilitate a "broader
coverage." On the contrary, Kostof's comparative analyses of
cross-cultural interaction offer little challenge to the foundations of
traditional historiographic enterprises because the theme of
cross-cultural interaction has often been used. Sir Bannister Fletcher,
for example, acknowledges that the "non-historical styles" of Chinese,
Indian, "Saracenic" architecture had some interaction with the western
styles (all styles feed from the same roots) even if the Western
tradition represents a dynamic, historical evolution while lesser styles
die out.2" (Pyla 1999:221)

"Although textbooks have assumed a license to condense material and
simplify issues, their impact is too great to allow their uncritical
assertions to be explained away by an appeal to simplicity and
accessibility. Even if an argument could be made that a textbook needs
to remain easily accessible to undergraduate students (although one
could question the very tendency to screen complexity out of
undergraduate history courses), it is also important to acknowledge that
simplicity in its various forms (condensation of ideas and concepts;
matter-of-fact descriptions; evasion of footnotes) is not simply a
benign method of facilitating comprehension but it also renders ever
more opaque the structure of knowledge and learning. In other words,
what is problematic about Kostof's approach has less to do with the
amount of knowledge he presents than with his naturalized
interpretations of history. Kostof's title, A History of Architecture,
may have attempted to acknowledge the incompleteness and partiality of
the historian's project; but despite the title, the textbook's
matter-of-fact descriptions do not problematize the incompleteness and
the contestability of the task of interpretation." (Pyla 1999:223)

"But while Kostof argues f all-embracing history, the textbook's
discussions resonate with specific conceptions of what is and is not
architecture. He clearly favors urban contexts, and the overwhelming
proportion of buildings he covers are canonical monuments." (Pyla
1999:224)

"Yet the opposition Kostof created between a singular history pluralism
is a false one, because pluralism and the idea "all buildings,
regardless of size, status or consequence, deserve studied" does not
automatically produce "a more democratic of architectural history."45 On
the contrary, the assertion that all buildings are worthy of study
assumes a priori an equality a all buildings, and as such, it is
disengaged knowledge claim " above" that is as dogmatic as the
totalizing claims to objectivity. The pluralism Kostof argues for
amounts to valorizing difference and of itself and eliminates the
possibility for critical negotiation among contested histories" (Pyla
1999:224)

"Kostof has made a great contribution to exposing the to rethink the
scope of architectural history, yet his approach embellishing, almost,
the central, canonical core of history samples of"otherness" maintains
the fundamental schism bet the dominant history and marginalized
histories" (Pyla 1999:224)

"Suppressed, or alternative histories do not represent new knowledge
that can simply be added onto the existing. Suppressed histories have
the potential to revise our understanding history at large, and this is
precisely why the expansion of the scope of history requires a radical
rethinking of the fundamental structure of history" (Pyla 1999:224)

# Momigliano on Vico and Winckelmann #

"In Italy, Vico had somehow prepared the way for a synthesis of
philosophy and erudition. In Germany and England some historians soon
combined the two elements. Winckelmann's History of Greek Art and
Gibbon's Decline and Fall are the products of this combination, and we
know how conscious Gibbon was of being both an antiquary and a
philosopher— that is, he was a philosophic historian with the
antiquarian's love of minutiae and nonliterary evidence." (Momigliano
1990:75)

# Baydar on Fletcher #

"By all standards, History of Architecture has been a canonical text
that has played a formative role in the history education of generations
of architects in English-speaking institutions. There is something
uniquely remarkable about Fletcher's text: unlike other monumental
histories (for example, those by Fisher von Erlach or James Fergusson)
that now lend themselves predominantly to historiographical analysis, it
has been continuously "updated" to preserve its "original" purpose to be
one of the most comprehensive surveys of world architectur" (Baydar
Nalbantoğlu 1998:8)

"The final edition bears testimony to the fact that, at least for a
considerable fraction of architectural historians, the book's canonical
status survive" (Baydar Nalbantoğlu 1998:10)

"Architecture, as a fixed category, becomes a burden. I discover how,
through Fletcher's and his successors' work, the boundary between the
inner and outer worlds of architecture is carefully maintained for the
purposes of disciplinary regulation and control. Working with and
through Fletcher's text, I discover that he knew the need to construct a
seamless boundary to retain the distinct nature of the inner and outer
realms of the discipline." (Baydar Nalbantoğlu 1998:10)

"It seems strange that Fletcher valorizes and disqualifies non-European
styles at the same time. "A history of world's architecture would be
incomplete," he says, if he did not review "those other styles." Yet a
history of Western architecture, which ought to lack nothing at all in
itself, should not require to be supplemented. It seems paradoxical that
the desire to be comprehensive and complete carries in itself the
destiny of its non-satisfaction" (Baydar Nalbantoğlu 1998:11)

"For Fletcher, nonhistorical styles are at once in excess of the
conditions of Western history and point to a lack in the essentially
complete history of Western architecture. When they are added on,
architectural history becomes both better (complete) and worse
(impure)." (Baydar Nalbantoğlu 1998:11)

""Nonhistorical styles" are signs that are allowed entry to fill up a
void. They point to a deficiency in the originary space and yet they are
alien to that which they replace. Fletcher's narrative inadvertently
complicates the plenitude that is constructed by the precarious alliance
of the terms "architecture" and "Western architecture."" (Baydar
Nalbantoğlu 1998:12)

"My argument is that in Fletcher's discourse, the seemingly cultural
basis of the East/West categorization represses an ambivalence about the
definition and limits of the architectural discipline." (Baydar
Nalbantoğlu 1998:12)

"Fletcher exposes a momentary enjoyment in such expressions as the
"bewildering richness" of Jaina architecture and the "majestic beauty"
of the 3. Examples Brahman temples. He cannot recover full pleasure from
these as that would mean to admit the loss of Western architecture's
self-identification." (Baydar Nalbantoğlu 1998:13)

"Beauty becomes unacceptable when it cannot be ordered by reason."
(Baydar Nalbantoğlu 1998:13)

"The self-consciously distanced grip of Fletcher's method tames the
nonhistorical styles by submitting them to the same framework of
architectural analysis as the Western ones. Not only East and West but
also Indian and Chinese and Renaissance and modern turn into
conveniently commensurable and hence comparable categories. Fletcher's
text is clearly marked by the nineteenth-century interest in the
non-West, which carries the double burden of curiosity and control.2"
(Baydar Nalbantoğlu 1998:14)

"his gaze witnesses its own historiographical violence prior to his
appropriation of the non-West into his comparative method.2 What I am
interested in here is not the criticism of Fletcher's method per se, but
his momentary recognition of how his framework violates difference; how
the writing of history makes history." (Baydar Nalbantoğlu 1998:14)

"In 1975 James Palmes eliminated all broad classifications and provided
a straight run of forty chapters.2 Following the first chapter on
Egyptian architecture, eight chapters cover all the non-Western
sections. The "pure" continuity of Western styles from ancient Greece to
the twentieth century is preserved. Non-Western sections are almost
relegated a "pre-Western" status." (Baydar Nalbantoğlu 1998:14)

"Cordingley, Palmes, and Musgrove normalize what Fletcher had found
problematic but had failed to problematize. Their premises are based on
cultural diversity rather than cultural difference. Cultural diversity,
according to Homi Bhabha, is a category of comparative ethics and
aesthetics that emphasizes liberal notions of multiculturalism and
cultural exchange. Cultural difference, on the other hand, "focuses on
the problem of the ambivalence of cultural authority: the attempt to
dominate in the name of a cultural supremacy which is itself produced
only in the moment of differentiation." (Baydar Nalbantoğlu 1998:15)

"At one level, Fletcher's text contains traces of awareness its own
textuality. It shows that only a particular methodological rigor of
thought, a textual framework, can cont his version of a history of world
architecture; but only cost of interpretive violence. This framework is
a representational tool that consolidates all reference and meaning
one's (in this case, nineteenth-century Western historiography's) own
terms; it refuses to recognize the irreducibility of the other to the
terms of the self." (Baydar Nalbantoğlu 1998:17)

# Wigley on architecture as a statement about time #

"When talking of memory, architects symptomatically forget the history
of their own discipline. It is precisely in so doing that they maintain
the discipline. An institutionalized memory loss makes possible the
regular cycles of lament and celebration of memory loss. The discourse
on collective memory presupposes a collective forgetting. It is this
very forgetting that allows the traditional aura of architecture to
survive and its displacement to appear as either a dangerous threat or a
seductive attraction. The aura is inseparable from stories about its
loss. Architecture is literally erected in the face of memory loss.
Taking a stand against the slippage of memory, it is unthinkable outside
the forces that apparently threaten to displace it. Consider the
contemporary scene. The challenge to the traditional conception of
architecture has never been clearer than today and yet there have never
been as many new monuments. As the average life of buildings has gone
down, the number of monuments has gone up exponentially." (Wigley
2000:34)

"Having spent their careers promoting the standardization and
reproduction of the basic forms and aesthetic of the canonic modern
buildings, Pevsner and his colleagues turned against reproduction in
favor of the singular auratic object. The global proliferation of a
"modern" architecture had become embarrassing. The copies had become a
threat to the originals. Reproduction itself was understood as a form of
decay that literally wears down the fabric of the canonic buildings."
(Wigley 2000:36)

"Buildings are understood as invaluable devices of collective
synchronization. Debates about architecture are debates about time.
Stories are told that link specific details of individual designs to
general claims about temporal flow. These stories permeate the
discourse, in formal publications or lectures, the rhetoric deployed
with clients or critics, images carefully associated with projects, the
strategic use of particular graphic techniques, the wording of captions,
wall labels in exhibitions, layouts of competition entries, comments
made on juries, and so on. An entire infrastructure of storytelling
labors away to position buildings in time." (Wigley 2000:38)

# Bozdoğan on postcolonial survey #

"The point is not to dismantle the myth of the architect as autonomous
and creative genius by replacing it with an equally problematic notion
of architect as a mere instrument or agent of historical forces,
ideologies, and politics. Rather, I wish to show how both the
architect's own agenda and the larger context inform the work in complex
ways." (Bozdoğan 1999:209)

"The classical surveys of modern architecture, too, epitomized by
Sigfried Giedion's Space, Time and Architecture (1941), had simply
perpetuated the same construct by representing twentieth-century
European modernism as the unique and rational expression of modern
industrial society and the teleological destiny of architectural
development everywhere else." (Bozdoğan 1999:209)

"in insisting on the difference shown by other cultures (of women,
blacks, orientals, and so forth) and resisting the naturalization of
this difference by a benign inclusion, postcolonial critics seek to
unsettle the canon itself and expose the relations of power that are
integral to its initial constitution as the canon." In other words, an
emphasis on cultural difference becomes a powerful strategic position
from which to tackle the western canon. Hence, postcolonial critics
emphasize cultural difference rather than cultural diversity" (Bozdoğan
1999:210)

"it seems to me that an emphasis on both difference and diversity is
necessary--an emphasis as much on what can be shared across cultures as
on what is different. To hold these two seemingly contradictory impulses
together is our only way out if we don't want cultural difference to be
reified into essentialist and timeless discourses of identity. In many
of his essays, Edward Said emphasizes the provisional nature of identity
politics and warns against perpetuating discourses of otherness and
victimization too far beyond the moment of insurgence" (Bozdoğan
1999:210)

"A major task of this methodological vigilance has to be contesting
portrayals of nonwestern cultures as bounded domains, i.e., as authentic
and timeless traditions with internally consistent essences. As is well
known, such portrayals have been at the center of the initial
constitution of the discipline of ethnography, as well as the so-called
area studies. Nonwestern architectures, like other forms of nonwestern
cultural production (art, literature, and music in particular) have
typically been viewed only as topics in area studies, as expressions of
some authentic identity outside western norms. For example, India offers
a classic case of this tendency to include and appreciate the work of
other cultures only insofar as they talk about their otherness, i.e.,
in so far as they reaffirm western self-consciousness through the
contrasting image of the other" (Bozdoğan 1999:211)

"the same coin that postcolonial criticism seeks to contest. The point
in architectural history is not to incorporate Indian, Chinese, Islamic
and other architectures into the western canon in some form of benign
tokenism, nor to discard the western canon and replace it with the works
of nonwestern others. Rather, the point is to show what Said calls
"intertwined histories," that is, to show that contrary to the basic
assumption of traditional Eurocentric historiography, the western canon
and the cultural production of societies outside Europe and North
America are not separate and independent." (Bozdoğan 1999:211)

"Whether the ambivalence of criticizing the western canon for its
exclusions while endorsing its classic status is a weakness that needs
to be eliminated or an irreconcilable but productive tension that we
have to live with is an open question. Leaving the theoretical debate
aside, however, I suggest that the latter offers us a more viable
pedagogical strategy for teaching architectural history to professional
design students. We can offer accounts of buildings that do not
privilege either the politics of architecture or the autonomy of the
architectural object, but are more interested in the connections and
slippages between the two. This allows us to differentiate between
individual works and discuss them with architectural criteria (such as
space, structure, materials, texture, and light) at the same time that
we talk about how they are part of the larger power relations and
ideological practices of the time." (Bozdoğan 1999:213)

"As I have ruminated in this paper, the challenge is first, to make the
modern survey more cross-cultural without either neutralizing or
reifying the difference of other cultures, and second, to make it more
political without reducing architecture to politics" (Bozdoğan 1999:215)

# Jarzombek on global history #

"A global history of architecture is not a return to the encyclopedic
worldview. Nor is it a bland validation of the great monuments of the
past or the rejection of those buildings. Finally, it is not a
prioritization of the "everyday" world, and it does not dismiss the
messy reality of how people live in complex urban, peri-urban, village,
and rural environments" (Jarzombek 2015:113)

"Even more important, although global history and "a global history of
architecture" have the word global in their titles, neither is a global
phenomenon. In their separate ways they are esoteric academic projects.
In other words, just because the word global is in their titles does not
mean they are globalized or even have that ambition. What is global,
however, is the recently emerging, geopolitical institutionality of
architecture's history" (Jarzombek 2015:113)

""Critical Regionalism," made popular by Kenneth Frampton, could also be
seen as a branch of contextualism; it spawned a minidiscipline that
scoured the world for overlooked local architects who could be both
modern and yet close to their supposed roots." (Jarzombek 2015:114)

"This type of cultural nationalism has now become standard operating
procedure around the world.11 As a result, the proverbial canon,
critiqued so strongly in the 1970s, is stronger today than it ever was,
for it was in essence outsourced to the geopolitics of the nation-state"
(Jarzombek 2015:117)

"the type of supporting role that "history" plays in all of this should
not be confused with history as a humanistic discipline. This is a
history operating within the confines of powerful, narcissistic regimes
of epistemological production that did not exist prior to the 1980s.
That is, the intellectual and political project that began to take shape
in the 1970s, often within the context of identity politics and
postcolonial sensibilities, came to be magnified and formalized by a
political-industrial matrix that was grounded in internationally
sanctioned, nation-affirming, and nation-building ideologies."
(Jarzombek 2015:118)

"Clearly the old Eurocentric view is now "balanced" by a nation-centric
view, one that is repeated in countries worldwide" (Jarzombek 2015:118)

"On the surface of things, the preservation industry, nation-based
historiography, and traditional architecture (again, with their
disciplinary foundations in a world of journals, publications,
researchers, conferences, institutions, and apps) were seen as
disciplines in opposition to modernism, when in reality tradition and
modernism are two sides of the same phenomenon, which to some degree
explains the profound lack of any kind of organized critique."
(Jarzombek 2015:118)

"Therein lies the problem I have been talking about: the
institutionalization, nationalization, bureaucratization, and
curatorialization of the division of modern and tradition. This is a
global problem that legitimates Eurocentrism as just one manifestation
of many types of centrism.

Historians of modern architecture have more or less turned a blind eye
to this entire problem. The result is an unholy alliance in which old
buildings in schools of architecture around the world are taught by
preservationists, often with localist leanings, whereas the
twentieth-century buildings are increasingly taught by historians,
producing an odd reversal of expectations. Architectural history—the
discipline—has almost become a code word for the history of modernism,
whereas the "historical"—now sadly often called "the premodern"—is
allied with epistemologies that champion the proverbial "pride of
place."" (Jarzombek 2015:119)

"As a global matrix, this expanded field uses the discipline we call
"history" as just another part of the selfnaturalization of the modern
while in the same breath trying to naturalize and universalize its
nation-based protocols. The problem, therefore, is not history but the
disciplining of history. The problem is not globalization but its more
precise variant, nationalization, and the globally sanctioned attempt to
naturalize its various epistemological productions. In the last three
decades this has become a historical phenomenon in its own right, one
that leads us, paradoxically, into the belly of the beast: the modern
geopolitical. To summarize: The 1970s saw the beginning of a
transformation across the board in academe. This was an exciting moment
of epistemological recuperation and institution building. But beginning
in the 1980s, the emergent disciplinary realities of modernism and
preservation, riding on the coattails of globalization, expanded their
horizons beyond expectations and became the new normal. The institutions
of today that define and protect these disciplines are, however, marked
by an increasing intransigence and lack of flexibility. This means that,
as valuable as the disciplinary innovation was back in the 1970s and
1980s, one has to make the transition into a different mind-set in order
to finish the fight." (Jarzombek 2015:120)

"With that in mind, a global history of architecture - not as that which
is merely there to re-produce the universal but as that which is
actively suppressed by it - bears witness to the inscribed limitations
of architecture's status quo. As such its first disciplinary task is to
expose the epistemological regimes - the globally enforced antiglobals -
that define a whole spectrum of
museological/administrative/pedagogical/curatorial practices that lie at
the core of the architectural world. A global history of architecture
is not a discipline; it is an accusation." (Jarzombek 2015:120)

# Keyvanian on why we study arch. history #

"Such defensive assertions of disciplinary autonomy, however, remain
ultimately sterile" (Keyvanian 2011:27)

"Is the need to graduate well-rounded individuals the only reason to
teach architectural history?" (Keyvanian 2011:28)

"provides students with a vocabulary with which to formulate and express
their ideas about architecture" (Keyvanian 2011:28)

"Fundamental questions on the task of architecture and the role of
architects should be examined in history courses" (Keyvanian 2011:29)

"A crucial lesson for beginners is that the architect's mission is not
to invent exciting new form" (Keyvanian 2011:29)

Keyvanian as a successor to Banister Fletcher:

"confused by more than minimal doses of lectures constructed along
thematic lines that do not take into account the architectural periods
they are familiar with. Further, chronological progression emphasizes
how architectural transformations emerged from the search for structural
and formal solutions to limitations imposed by existing technolog"
(Keyvanian 2011:31)

"Reading and written assignments should reinforce the systematic linking
of histor examples to current concern" (Keyvanian 2011:31)

"Bearing in mind the pedagogical advantage of emphasizing the current
relevance of historical precedents helps us select those works that are
most useful in assembling lessons of theoretical significance."
(Keyvanian 2011:32)

# Vernacular architecture as history #

"At any given time and in any given place almost any kind of building
can be included within the boundaries of what those of us working in the
field call vernacular architecture. Such catholicity has led" (Carter
and Herman 1991:2)

"many observers to characterize vernacular architecture studies at best
as expansive and at worst, vaporous." (Carter and Herman 1991:2)

"One of the most pervasive and persuasive definitions of vernacular
architecture follows a line of thinking based in linguistics: vernacular
buildings are localized versions of widely known forms" (Carter and
Herman 1991:3)

"In actual operation, vernacular architecture is a kind of architectural
study with a strong orientation toward historical explanation and as
such is both similar to and different from two close
relatives-architectural history and the new social history. Yet we
commonly distance vernacular architecture from traditional architectural
history out of a belief that architectural historians are concerned only
with the object or the "piece" of architecture rather than with history
in general." (Carter and Herman 1991:4)

"These authors have provided fine excursions into the literature of
architecture and popular culture, but books such as these are not true
architectural studies because they are not based on the field
investigation or actual buildings." (Carter and Herman 1991:5)

"those of us who study vernacular architecture or, better yet, those of
us who have adopted the vernacular architecture approach, are at heart
architectural historians." (Carter and Herman 1991:5)

"The kind of architectural history we pursue, however, remains
distinctive in its scope. We are concerned with developing an approach
to architectural history that emphasizes historical explanation and
speaks of architectural systems or landscapes, high and low, both common
and elite. In pursuit of these goals we draw on the methods of cultural
and historical geography, historical archaeology, linguistic and
literary theory, as well as the new social history and architectural
history." (Carter and Herman 1991:5)

"Because vernacular architecture now describes an approach to the study
of buildings and because the particular configuration of this approach
is innovative, we are tempted to use the term *the new architectural
history*." (Carter and Herman 1991:5)

