---
title: "Comparative Histories of Architecture: History, Architecture, or Idealism?"
author: Pedro P. Palazzo
date: 2021-09-17
tags:
---

Comparative histories of architecture arose in the second half of the
nineteenth century from the Idealist philosophy of history. Canonical
textbooks claimed European architecture alone had the superior ability
to perform meaningful 'historical change' out of the passage of time. At
the same time, comparative history was embedded into the theory and
practice of architecture, blending seamlessly with professional
education. The critical historians' refutation of Idealism since the
twentieth century disputed both the evolutionism and the disciplinary
bounds of comparative history.

A major achievement of critical theorists was to dispel the belief in a
universal standard for assessing different cultures. At the same time,
architectural history must integrate the irreducible diversity of
cultures into 'global' surveys. This paradox shows in the shortcomings
of a couple of otherwise brilliant recent textbooks. One of them evades
the Idealist narrative by juxtaposing examples in simple chronological
order; in so doing, however, it reinforces the Western idea that only
linear time underpins historical meaning---an idea utterly foreign to
many cultures it portrays, and quite confusing in practice. Another one
showcases different cultures walled off from one another in discrete
chapters; it feels like the written form of a colonial ethnographic
museum.

Given the persistence of these same old Idealist pitfalls, architectural
history stands to gain from reassessing and questioning more explicitly
the methods of comparative history and their emphasis on disciplinary
subject matter---buildings. Which strongly disciplinary approaches, such
as vernacular studies or building archaeology, have also been sidelined
by 'non-disciplinary' criticism among historians? Can a survey be
organized around some other criterion than chronological order or
culture-epochs, yet remain intelligible and honest to its subject? For
better or for worse, these questions show how much of the legacy of
comparative history still bears upon the paradoxes of critical history.

