---
title: "Comparative Histories of Architecture"
subtitle: "History, Architecture, or Idealism?"
author: Pedro P. Palazzo
date: "[EAHN]{.smallcaps} 2022"
lang: en-US
bibliography: _bibliography.yaml
csl: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/citation-style-language/styles/master/chicago-fullnote-bibliography-with-ibid.csl
suppress-bibliography: true
abstract: >
  <= 300 words
keywords:
  - between 3 and 5, capitalised
---

# Introduction #

In this paper, I contrast two ways of looking at the
architecture of the past: "comparative histories" and "critical
history". Many textbooks from the 19^th^ and 20^th^ centuries adopted a
*comparative method*, made famous by Banister Fletcher's eponymous book
[@fletcher:1905history]. More recently, however, critique has become so
central to our understanding of the "duty" of history
[@tafuri:1968teorie] that we would hardly admit comparative studies as a
form *history* at all. This notwithstanding, I argue the comparative form has a
stronger claim to being *architecture*. This brings up a long-standing
paradox regarding the place of architectural history in professional
education and practice. I discuss how this paradox plays out in a few
recent textbooks that attempted to distance themselves from the
comparative method. Then, I look at other disciplinary methods used in
the study of past architecture and their relation to historical
critique.

# Purposes of comparative history #

Comparative histories of architecture were developed in Europe during
the second half of the 19^th^ century at the intersection of two
intellectual movements: on the one hand, the Idealist philosophy of
history, running from Vico and Winckelmann
[@momigliano:1990classical, 75] to Hegel, Herder, and Marx
[@rose:1984marxs]; on the other hand, the articulation of the
disciplinary field of architectural practice and education that Épron
saw at the heart of eclecticism [@epron:1997comprendre]. Comparative
textbooks such as Fergusson's early *Illustrated Handbook of
Architecture* [@fergusson:1855illustrated], Barberot's *Histoire des
styles* [@barberot:1891histoire], Choisy's *Histoire de l'architecture*
[@choisy:1899histoire], or Fletchers' *History of Architecture on the
Comparative Method* [@fletcher:1905history] portrayed architectural
history as a collection of culture--epochs through time and space, each
signaled by a characteristic style [@barberot:1891histoire1, v]. These
styles did not arise at random, but resulted almost deterministically
from the interplay between the historical unfolding of the human mind
and the constraints of geography, climate, materials, and inherited
technical knowledge.

The deterministic development of style was not the only aspect of an
Idealist philosophy of history that these 19^th^-century textbooks
borrowed. They also consolidated a practice that would become a hallmark
of architectural history textbooks to the present day: using a few,
paradigmatic examples to stand in for the general character of a
culture--epoch [@ghirardo:2008review67]. Idealist systems of art
history, from Hegel to Wölfflin and Zevi, are infamous (and somewhat
unfairly so) for having little concern for the particulars of individual
facts. Choisy, for example, drew analyses from a wealth of specific
buildings from the Ancient and Medieval Mediterranean. He had studied
some of these in detail in his earlier work on Roman and Byzantine
architecture [@choisy:1873romains; @choisy:1883byzantins]. In his
broader *Histoire de l'architecture*, on the other hand, he presented
only partial aspects of each building insofar as they served to
illustrate the general characteristics and trends of each style. In a
sense, Choisy's canon is not made of great works, but of general
principles; the Renaissance, a period when individual character slowly
gains ground over cultural trends, is only superficially discussed at
the end of the second volume of his textbook.

Comparative histories of architecture did not, of course, invent
the Western canon and its oversimplifications. However, James Fergusson,
for one, may very well have been partly responsible for giving a
rationale for this canon. Long before Banister Fletcher's "historical"
and "non-historical" styles [@baydar:1998postcolonial, 11], in 1855
Fergusson split the history of architecture between, on the one hand,
most "Pagan" styles, and on the other hand, "Christian" buildings
together with their direct precedents in "Pagan", i.e. classical,
societies [@fergusson:1855illustrated1, vii]. Thus, he implied only that
strand leading through classical Antiquity to the Gothic style was
worthy of study for its historical development.

At the same time as it painted architecture in general strokes where the
individual building was only proof of a general concept, the discourse
of comparative history gave great weight to the architects'
decision-making in response to these external constraints. This apparent
contradiction is resolved when we look at the context in which
architectural history arose. Like art history, architectural scholarship
in 19^th^-century Europe was concerned with making sense of a growing
body of works unveiled by archaeology and colonialism. Unlike art
history, on the other hand, the history of architecture could not
retreat into a narrative of formal autonomy. The systematic knowledge of
classical and non-classical styles developed alongside the European
architects' insecurity about the very nature of the profession.

Comparative studies were therefore called upon to provide both
justification for aesthetic judgments---that is, the choice among a
myriad styles---and a rationale for framing the discipline of
architecture as a whole. The professional expertise of the architect was
described historically in surveys of architectural decision-making
visible through canonical buildings, while at the same time being
defined by the 19^th^-century architect's knowledge and use of such
precedents. By means of historical classifications, writes Baydar
Gülsum, "the boundary between the inner and outer worlds of architecture
is carefully maintained for the purposes of disciplinary regulation and
control." [@baydar:1998postcolonial, 8]

The expertise of architects was not limited to the choice of visual
precedents: with industrial and managerial development came increasingly
specific functional requirements [@tzonis:1972non-oppressive], and these
were at the core of what differentiated the Beaux-Arts architect from
the Polytechnic engineer [@epron:1997comprendre]. It is worth noting
that Banister Fletcher himself made a career in the design of
utilitarian buildings before writing his textbook. Not only the program
strictly speaking, but a whole range of sociocultural expectations and
material, technical, or economic constraints had to be explicitly taken
into account in the design of modern plants. *Explicitly* is the key
word here, of course, since these factors had always been present in
some way or another in every building culture. The "crisis" of modern
European architecture, however, was that the myriad variables of design
were no longer taken care of by a system of traditional, impersonal
wisdom, but had to be expressly articulated with each new, unique
project [@caniggia:1987progetto, 24]. Architects thus felt the need to
emulate other "branches of artistic or scientific research" and devote
"philosophical inquiry" to their discipline
[@fergusson:1855illustrated1, v].

In this practical sense, the past was not just a moral teacher in
matters of style. It was a trove of inspirational examples where
architects had balanced a variety of social and material requirements,
responded to their cultural and geographic context, while producing
authentic styles of their own times. I contend the reason comparative
histories of architecture focused so much on visual articulation was not
because their authors were oblivious to the social or material
conditions of the production of architecture---they made explicit points
about it, and it shows in the chapter structure of Banister Fletcher's
book. Rather, it was because this kind of formal problem-solving
translated best across time and space, through very different cultures
and conditions, and therefore could be exemplary for the modern student
of architecture.

Consider, for example, the following statements drawn from each of our
sources (my italics):

#### James Fergusson ####

> Another refinement [in Greek columns] was making all the columns slope
> slightly inwards, *so as to give an idea of strength and support to
> the whole.* [@fergusson:1855illustrated1, 269]

#### Banister Fletcher ####

> The main entrance [of the English Gothic church] was frequently by a
> south-western porch, *acting as a screen against the cold winds*...
> [@fletcher:1905history, 299]

#### Auguste Choisy ####

> Most romanesque barrel vaults have their intrados broken up at regular
> intervals by ribs ... *these ribs were strengthening to
> brace thin vaults. But it was chiefly during construction of these
> vaults that such ribs were useful ...* [@choisy:1899histoire2, 150, my
> translation]

In each case, the description of a motif (roman text) is followed by a
rationale for its existence, in the form of a problem this motif solved
(italicized text). This rationale was alternatively aesthetic,
functional, or structural, and each writer deployed all three kinds of
justifications at different places. Ultimately, the hierarchy of styles
in their textbooks followed not just Eurocentric prejudice, but each
writer's judgment as to the usefulness of their examples for modern
professional practice. Thus, Fergusson and Choisy included the
Mediterranean Islamic tradition within the historical development of
Western architecture, whereas Fletcher consigned it to the
"non-historical styles."

Comparative historians made self-conscious choices in how to approach
their subject matter. Their outlook on history was avowedly disciplinary
and internalist: the broader natural and social context was invoked to
coalesce on how architects responded to them by means of specific design
decisions. Moreover, they emphasized the transfer and transformation of
professional practice as evidenced by the evolution of compositional and
decorative devices. In this sense, then, comparative histories of
architecture were not so much *history* as they were *architecture*:
that their examples happened to have been built in the past was
incidental.

# Critical history and the global textbook #

Comparative histories of architecture fit the purpose they were
conceived for in the context of professional education and practice in
19^th^-century Europe. However, they were predicated on a questionable
assumption: that the way builders throughout history addressed problems
of construction could be likened to the modern, self-conscious design
process of the Western architect. Critical historians from the late
19^th^ to the mid-20^th^ century attacked this assumption decades before
the comparative histories' colonialist underpinnings would even come
under scrutiny. This tension was already latent by the turn of the
century, as evidenced both in the Europeans' unease at the temporality
of their own architecture [@wigley:2000architectural94] and in the
uneasy disciplinary delimitation of this discipline
[@baydar:1998postcolonial].

The consolidation of critical history was accompanied by a faltering of
interest in the architectural history textbook, at least in Great
Britain and the United States. The last running edition of Choisy's
*Histoire de l'architecture* dates from 1964, at a time when it was
still the authoritative textbook at the École des Beaux-Arts
[@choisy:1964histoire; a facsimilar edition was issued by Le Moniteur
for the first edition's hundredth anniversary in 1996]. Banister
Fletcher's book was last issued in the form sanctioned by its original
authors in 1961. "The new ideal was that history ought to be an agent of
disjunction where the emphasis was on analysis rather than on synthesis"
[@hoekstra:2014modernity2].

Whether it is realistic to expect an architectural history curriculum to
be predicated on fragments is a different story. The definition of
history as a constant rearrangement of fragments [@bann:1987clio23;
@tafuri:1977storico, 18] is certainly correct from the perspective of
how original research works. However, those who put forward this notion,
and who rearrange these fragments deftly, were themselves educated on
the synthetic view of the past practiced by the comparative method.
Moreover, the humanistic ideal of architecture education in the Americas
and the Iberian peninsula continued to demand some sort of broad outline
of the past. Spiro Kostof's 1985 *History of Architecture*
[@kostof:1985history] was a transitional attempt at reconciling the
comparative history focused on the development of the Greco-Roman
tradition with an awareness that this tradition was not isolated from
non-Western cultures.

A major contribution of critical history was to dispel the belief in a
universal standard for assessing different cultures. In this ever
evolving landscape, such a compromise work as Kostof's could not claim
an authoritative status for too long. The Cypriot architectural
historial, Panayiota Pyla pointed out early on how Kostof still used
"Renaissance architecture as a yardstick" against which to assess other
building cultures, and showed little interest in those where interaction
with Europe had been limited [@pyla:1999historicizing52, 218--219]. Pyla
wrote her article on Kostof while a doctoral researcher under Mark
Jarzombek at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology; both
Cambridge-based universities, the [MIT]{.smallcaps} and Harvard, have in
fact been hotbeds of thinking about critical perspectives in
architectural history beyond the Western canon.

It was at the [MIT]{.smallcaps} that a research circle formed in the
1990s and early 2000s leading up to the publication in 2007 of *A Global
History of Architecture* [@ching:2007global]. Mark Jarzombek and another
of his former doctoral advisees, Virkamāditya Prakāsh, co-authored the
book together with Francis D. K. Ching, whom Prakāsh had joined as
faculty member of Washington University. The rationale for this "global
history" of architecture, Jarzombek went on to claim, was an explicit
rejection of the "globalized" appropriation of architecture as a diverse
collection of national histories [@jarzombek:2015architecture, 112].
This claim can be likened to an earlier argument by Sibel Bozdoğan---who
has been affiliated with both the [MIT]{.smallcaps} and Harvard---on the
opposition between difference and diversity in the architectural history
survey [@bozdogan:1999architectural, 209]. Postcolonial critique,
Bozdoğan had written, resists naturalizing cultural differences as an
ethnographic exhibition of diversity [@bozdogan:1999architectural, 210].

Given this genealogy of critical approaches to global history, let us
look at how *A Global History* presented its subject matter. At first
sight, it would seem the authors of *A Global History* went for just
that kind of "encyclopaedic" diversity Jarzombek rejected
[@jarzombek:2015architecture, 112]. It chained discrete examples in
simple chronological order, under chapter headings with numbered years
rather than named culture--epochs. The actual structure of the book,
however, has a clear goal beneath this surface. To understand what it
is, we must look at the market it was designed for.

Carla Keyvanian, a professor of architectural history at Auburn
University, stated as a legitimate goal for history teaching in
professional programs in the United States, to emphasize "how
architectural transformations emerged from the search for structural and
formal solutions to limitations imposed by existing technology"
[@keyvanian:2011teaching64, 30]. This sounds eerily like Banister
Fletcher's distinction between "historical" and "non-historical" styles
on the basis of the development of structural and formal solutions
through time. Yet, Keyvanian argues, this is a necessary accommodation
for students in professional architecture programs that include
extensive history coursework as part of a humanistic emphasis.

*A Global History of Architecture* is a disciplinary textbook geared to
just the same humanistic bent in professional curricula of architecture
schools in the Americas that Keyvanian works with. As such, it
compromised the critical approach to history by seeking to establish a
narrative that will make sense for students who are not expected to
become primarily historians. Therefore, it tempered the thematic
autonomy of its discrete examples by reinforcing the Western historicist
idea that a simple chronological succession is an intrinsically
meaningful way of presenting content. This is so much the case that even
*A Global History*'s seemingly neutral chapter headings actually show,
upon closer inspection, they might as well have been modeled after
conventional epochs in European art history ([@tbl:epochs]).

Table: Parallel between chapter headings in *A Global History of Architecture* and conventional epochs of Western art history {#tbl:epochs}

|                Chapter | Epoch of Western art history           |
|-----------------------:|----------------------------------------|
| 3500 [BCE]{.smallcaps} | Urban revolution in Mesopotamia        |
| 2500 [BCE]{.smallcaps} | Old Kingdom Egypt                      |
| 1500 [BCE]{.smallcaps} | New Kingdom Egypt and Mycenaean Greece |
|  800 [BCE]{.smallcaps} | Iron Age Europe and Archaic Greece     |
|  400 [BCE]{.smallcaps} | Axial Age and Classical Greece         |
|                      0 | Hellenistic period                     |
|   200 [CE]{.smallcaps} | Imperial Rome                          |
|   400 [CE]{.smallcaps} | Late Antiquity                         |
|   600 [CE]{.smallcaps} | Byzantine period                       |
|   800 [CE]{.smallcaps} | Carolingian period                     |
|  1000 [CE]{.smallcaps} | Romanesque                             |
|  1200 [CE]{.smallcaps} | Gothic                                 |
|  1400 [CE]{.smallcaps} | Renaissance                            |
|  1600 [CE]{.smallcaps} | Baroque                                |
|  1700 [CE]{.smallcaps} | Neoclassicism                          |
|  1800 [CE]{.smallcaps} | Eclecticism                            |
|  1900 [CE]{.smallcaps} | Pioneers of modern design              |
|  1950 [CE]{.smallcaps} | High Modernism and beyond              |

Manfredo Tafuri argued that the abuse of architectural history in design
bred "reckless iconology and anachronism" [@tafuri:1991introduzione, 7].
Though *A Global History*'s authors shunned stylistic analysis in
general, including iconology, they fell into the anachronistic pitfall
that linear time is the one legitimate source of meaning for all the
world. The textbook projected backwards the contemporary anxiety about
essentializing non-Western traditions, and in so doing neutralized the
difference between the historicist societies arising in Early Modern
Eurasia and others having different understandings of cultural
transmission through time. In the same way the heavily refactored recent
editions of Banister Fletcher's *History of Architecture* proceeded
[@baydar:1998postcolonial, 13], *A Global History* reduced so-called
"non-Western" societies to the Western student's grasp of linear
history.

# Non-disciplinary history in architectural education #

Kathleen James-Chakraborty circumvented the historicist
pitfall in her book *Architecture since 1400*. She did so by explicitly
restricting her work to a time period and cultural universe where
historicism is evidently a legitimate interpretive frame. The "basic
premise" of the book is that 1400 marks an epoch in
that awareness of one's own history comes to bear increasingly in the
architecture of different cultures [@james-chakraborty:2014architecture,
xvii]. This insight freed her to explore fully the methodological
resources of current historiography. Thus, her second premise is that
architecture is not an achievement of
great artists and their patrons, but a conversation among many social
agents [@james-chakraborty:2014architecture, xviii]. This follows neatly
from the core "project" of critical history [@tafuri:1977storico], to
dismantle the link of architectural history with the contemporary
understanding of the architectural profession.

We already looked at Baydar's argument as to why this disciplinary
delimitation of architectural history was problematic in Banister
Fletcher's *History*. When putting forward the anti-disciplinary program
of critical history, Tafuri dismissed the visual analysis of
architecture, the disciplinary toolkit *par excellence*. He considered
it hopelessly bound by whichever ideological system was current. In
contrast, he claimed, the complex web of relations that made up the
productive system of architecture could only be critiqued in non-visual
terms [@tafuri:1980sfera]. James-Chakraborty heeded this lesson and
downplayed reliance on images as a gateway for understanding the social
role of buildings: of the Gate of Felicity in Topkapı palace, she said
"it may not seem particularly imposing, but that is because architecture
was never the whole story here"
[@james-chakraborty:2014architecture, 95].

*Architecture since 1400* is, true to its critical premises, history
*through* architecture more than history *of* architecture. In this
trade-off, decreased reliance on visual analysis opens up narrative
possibilities that result in more subtle connections. The author showed
how cultural transfer often flowed backwards from what the Eurocentric
historiography would have us believe [@hirsh:2017review76, 242]. That
said, some connections are so distant, materially and conceptually, as
to be inconsequential literary devices. Consider, for example, this
account of Versailles:

> If Bess’s gaze out from the long gallery of Hardwick Hall gave her
> command of the surrounding territory, and Shah Abbas viewed the
> proceedings on the Maidan from the Ali Qapu, on how much greater a
> scale could Louis XIV look out over his dominion...
> [@james-chakraborty:2014architecture, 163]

If *A Global History* fell into the pitfall of apparent narrative
neutrality, then certainly *Architecture since 1400* fell into that of
discounting its very subject matter; more than a decade before its
publication, Johannes Albrecht, following Susan Sontag, regretted that,
in the current critical landscape, "even if the building has received
attention, it is ultimately the interpretation and not the building that
is of interest." [@albrecht:2002interpretation55, 194] James-Chakraborty
is a far more rigorous scholar than the theorists Albrecht was aiming
at. Still, for all its decentering of European assumptions, her book's
final premise sounds oddly Idealistic: "rather than merely reflecting
culture, architecture contributes to crafting it"
[@james-chakraborty:2014architecture, xix].

But if the book consistently downplays the disciplinary aspects of
practice---visual composition and professional tradition, how can it
define an architecture that crafts culture and is not itself this
culture? It can only be the abstract ideas that shuttle back and forth
between architectural theory and other social actors. The precedence of
the avant-garde (chapter 22) over mass culture (chapter 23) makes the
author's intent clear in this respect. What ties *Architecture since
1400* together is the assumption that modernization and historicism are
common features of many of the building cultures described in the book.
This assumption, however, is Idealistic and teleological in nature.

# Disciplinary tools in (or around) critical history #

So far, we have looked at how the disciplinary, totalizing method of
comparative histories harbors intrinsic contradictions, which critical
history has exposed and replaced with a provisional assemblage of a
fragmentary subject matter. We have also seen how architectural history
textbooks crafted for professional education have struggled to evade the
determinism of the comparative approach, even when the critical method
underpins their premises. This process thus represents an incomplete
transition from the study of buildings within the disciplinary framework
of architecture, and towards a non-disciplinary historiographic ideal of
the past as an entirely textual construct. This transition, however,
will be ever incomplete insofar as the textual field of
non-disciplinary, critical history leverages physical evidence produced
by disciplinary, comparative fields. Tafuri is well-known for condemning
the ideological dependency of history upon architecture. Yet he also
made clear, in his later writings, a thorough study of architectural
history must reach beyond a generic commitment to the critical treatment
of documentary evidence, and rely on some sort of disciplinary framework
that could address the problem of "*which* philology [is required] for
*this* particular subject" [@tafuri:1991introduzione, 7-8].

The philological framework architectural history demands lies nowadays,
to a great extent, in the disciplinary field of building archaeology. It
is a specialization that arose with the name of *Bauforschung* (building
research or scholarship) in late 19^th^-century Germany. To its early
practitioners such as Wilhelm Dörpfeld [@sapirstein:2016columns120] and
Josef Durm [@durm:1905baukunst; @durm:1910baukunst], *Bauforschung*
provided solid evidence as opposed to the questionable interpretations
of stylistic analysis [@azkarate:2020archaeology, 526]. Building
archaeology therefore arose, in a sense, out of a critical view of
history and a rejection of comparative studies. Nevertheless, it is
still a form of architectural scholarship above all, and continues to be
taught in German-speaking countries as part of a professional curriculum
in architecture [@neumann:2002teaching, 374-5].

Of course, many of the early assumptions of classical *Bauforschung*
went on to be refuted, most notably Durm's reconstruction of the wooden
Doric entablature after Charles Chipiez [@durm:1910baukunst;
@chipiez:1876histoire. For a convincing building archaeology of the rise
of the Doric order, see @barletta:2009origins]. Since the 1950s,
archaeological stratigraphy has contributed a great deal to the current
methodological makeup of building archaeology and to the near complete
abandonment of stylistic analysis as a means of dating buildings
[@azkarate:2020archaeology, 521]. Nevertheless, with respect to the
textual tradition of critical history, building archaeology was long an
outlier, perhaps distrusted on account of the latter's claim of direct
access to physical evidence of the past [@perotti:2001archeologia, 379].
Architectural history still needs to come more fully to terms with the
disciplinary character of building archaeology. The field of
construction history, for one, has welcomed disciplinary studies as
specific as the structural calculation of traditional components
[@dacunto:2019vector-based167]. Textual critique, on the other hand,
still allows the historian the comfortable position of working with a
past that can never be truly actualized, rather than the unsettling
perspective of a historic building looming over the present.

However, building archaeology is still the study of buildings from the
past, with the incidental task of supporting conservation. It might
therefore be discounted as a supporting discipline rather than as
historical scholarship on its own right. Vernacular architecture
studies, on the other hand, add a layer of complication to the issue of
whether historical critique can be embedded in a disciplinary setting.
Vernacular architecture, by contrast, has often been viewed as an
intrinsically operative, and therefore disciplinary, field. First, it
deals with social subjects that are not safely stationed in the past,
but continue into the present and look towards the future
[@vellinga:2006engaging, 83]. Second, this continuity means scholarship
often ends up entangled with building practice, both in experimental
settings and as part of social activism [@ozkan:2006traditionalism,
104--106].

This would seem to invalidate any claim that vernacular
architecture studies might be a form of history, considering Tafuri's
assertion that there can be no such thing as operative history
[@tafuri:1988teorie, 263]. However, vernacular architecture studies
arose unquestionably from a critical framework. Contemporary interest in
vernacular built environments stems from anthropological studies in the
1960s and 70s [@ara:2016imaging21, 174], notably Amos Rapoport's
[@rapoport:1969house], Henry Glassie's [@glassie:1976folk], and Paul
Oliver's [@oliver:2006built]. Since then, scholars of vernacular
buildings have increasingly claimed historical status for their
research, for much the same reasons as building archaeology
[@carter:1991introduction4]. Architectural anthropology may still deal,
to some degree, with present-day societies, but it no longer assumes any
timeless quality in culture. Instead, it actively engages with cultural
change in historical time, and does so with a critical outlook in each
society's own terms [@egenter:1980bauform, 12].

An even stronger claim for melding critical history and disciplinary
insertion lies in the archaeology of architecture, a field that deals
chiefly with the same vernacular built environment as architectural
anthropology. Whereas building archaeology is chiefly concerned with
ascertaining the physical process of buildings through time, the
archaeology of architecture deals with the full range of human dwelling.
The "fog" that Mikkel Bille and Tim Sørensen used to define the
archaeology of architecture [@bille:2016fog, 1] is precisely the
ever-changing critical landscape of history adapting its methods to both
its discrete objects of study and contemporary research interests that
Tafuri posited for architectural history. Archaeologies of architecture
are critical endeavors committed to constantly unsettling established
pictures of past societies and do not restrict themselves to a
contemporary *bounding* of architecture [@kent:2001domestic]. Still,
they do so by leveraging analytical skills that pertain to the
contemporary professional discipline of architecture, including
functional and symbolic ways of dwelling, social hierarchies, and even
the reconstruction of the climate inside and around buildings
[@steadman:2015archaeology].

This disciplinary affinity is not without its pitfalls itself.

Vernacular architecture as a sort of disciplined anti-global history
institutionalized by nationalist ideology in the guise of historic
preservation [@jarzombek:2015architecture].

Vernacular architecture studies presently in tension between the
definition of vernacular as traditional, even if under transformation,
ways of making, and as local cultural manifestations [@perez:2018marco].
The traditional way of making is further divided between the celebration
of abstract qualities [@asatekin:1990varieties1] and that of
identifiable processes [@florentino:2020vernacularXLIV-M-1-2020].
Cultural sustainability [@memmott:2015redefining58].

# Conclusion #

Even as these two books explicitly reject the colonial *argument* for
European supremacy, their approaches to 'collecting' buildings and
societies uphold the colonial *structure* of the universal ethnographic
museum, curious but exotic to its target audience---the post-Postmodern,
Western student. It is these books' very partaking in the
non-disciplinary understanding of 'critical history' that has made them
fall into this Idealist pitfall. By confronting their perspectives with
the unapologetically disciplinary approach of comparative histories, we
can begin to unpack the ways in which different forms of writing have
been legitimized in different contexts as 'proper' history or as
'properly architectural' history. This brings other, more practical
questions to the surface as well. For example, which
other disciplinary approaches, such
as vernacular studies or building archaeology, have also been sidelined
by non-disciplinary criticism among historians? Can a survey be
organized around some other criterion than chronological order or
culture-epochs, yet remain intelligible and honest to its subject? For
better or for worse, these questions show how much of the legacy of
comparative history still bears upon the paradoxes of critical history.

Critical history's conundrum: can we legitimately have a history *of*
architecture, as opposed to a social or cultural history that *uses*
buildings, and what does that difference even mean?

<!--
   -We found your abstract particularly compelling, but believe that it
   -could benefit from more detail, for example, what are the few recent
   -books that you will be considering in your position paper. We would like
   -to encourage you to read the RT provocation and make sure your abstract
   -states a position in response. Before 20 December, please send us the
   -final version of your abstract.
   -
   -RT03 – Historiography, get it right!
   -
   -Roundtable sponsored by the Society of Architectural Historians
   -Australia and New Zealand.
   -
   -Chairs: Macarena de la Vega, University of Melbourne; Gevork Hartoonian,
   -University of Canberra.
   -
   -… experience of the mole of History burrowing through a lengthy past and
   -creating its specific traditions in the process.                    
   -E. P. Thompson
   -
   -Yes, histories of architecture do produce traditions: the styles
   -associated with certain periods, the connections made between tendencies
   -and a certain group of architects. Above all, the conjectures which
   -historians have construed and constructed in the delusion that they can
   -capture the Zeitgeist. Nevertheless, should this ever-growing body of
   -work be taken for History? To what extent does a text on the past
   -approximate History? More specifically, what is the intersection between
   -History and histories of architecture? Not every work concerned with
   -past architecture is categorically historical, especially those written
   -in the last twenty years. With the contemporary demise of Theory at
   -least in architectural praxis, the decline of which was foreshadowed by
   -the death of Jacques Derrida, useful binaries such as history and
   -theory, history and criticism have lost their visibility, smoothing the
   -way for the prevailing textuality. This turn of events is coterminous
   -with the dissemination of contemporary digital networks engineered by
   -global capitalism. Rather than to claim “the death of history,” the
   -question is in what capacity does architectural history index History
   -beyond contingencies, without reducing the text to only empirical
   -realities, including those collected through archival research.
   -
   -To go beyond “reportage” and “textuality,” the two unconscious
   -dimensions of contemporary history writing, we should recall the past
   -accurately. Manfredo Tafuri, for one, said it all: there is no criticism
   -but history. We argue that there is no history but historical criticism.
   -In this sense, the non-contemporaneity implied in the dialectics of past
   -and present plays a crucial role to the point that, like a detective,
   -the historian should seek clues lost in between fragments of collected
   -facts, subjective and objective. To follow E.P. Thompson, to be
   -critically effective, the historiography of architecture should organise
   -and interpret facts and ideas taking into account the specific
   -traditions established by the mole of History. We invite papers that
   -respond to the provocations framed above and that investigate critical
   -strategies in architectural historiography with a focus on one of these
   -topics: heritage and the past present, monumentality and the past
   -frozen, landscape and the everlasting, historical time and temporality,
   -and contemporaneity of architecture and history.
   -->

